Now, we're kinda entering the final
advanced kinda section for using Solid.
And a lot of this comes from the progress
we've made in the last couple years.
I started Solid back in 2016 and
most of the mechanics that I've showed
you so far, existed at that time.
But since 2019 there's
been a lot of movement,
a lot of things like SSR and
new rendering modes.
And Solid has grown in the last
three years to kinda anticipate and
work with those.
And a big part of that comes down to kinda
overarching application architecture.
So the last piece I really
wanna talk about today and
show off is routing and
async data patterns.
Because these are things you need
in pretty much every app, and
there's something that are more emphasized
when you think of your framework as a full
stack framework rather than just a client
side rendered thing like we've been
doing so far.
So, yeah, I mean, I'm not giving
the full history here, but I'm gonna say
that client side routing, arguably has
been like contributing to the biggest,
I guess, evolution in modern web
development for the last 15 years.
Like it's not a new thing but
it's a reason why we have
single page apps, right?
This idea that you don't have to go all
the way full page to the server to get
the next page.
You can just request some JSON and
basically keep everything in the client.
This has allowed us,
not requiring these full page reloads,
allows us to kinda navigate to new pages
and make it feel more native like with
things like animations and transitions,
giving better immersive experiences.
And so client side routing is
the main way we do routing in Solid.
Big part of our routing it's always
been something called nested routing.
And again,
I'm not gonna give a full history here,
nested routing existed back
in like the Rails days.
It got into JavaScript I think, around
2011-ish Ember.js had nested routing.
And then very shortly after
around 2013-14 period
React Router 1 came out
with nested routing.
And Vue has nested routing and
Svelte has nested routing,
literally everybody has nested routing,
all the way up to I think Next.js got
rested nested routing more recently.
But the idea here is that
instead of re-rendering
the whole page on navigation,
we kind of view it almost like
a series of layers that are tied
to sections of the URL.
So if you had to say, a list of shapes,
that would be responsible for, say,
an outer layer and then the specific
shape could be that inner content area.
And that way if we just change part of
the URL, we only change part of the UI.
And this was very important to
Solid right from the beginning,
we never considered anything but
nested routing because our rendering
renders once and uses real dom notes.
So it's very awkward if we were going
to like re-render the whole page,
we'd be recreating all the dom notes.
So nested routing has been there
with Solid since the beginning and
it's kinda very core to what we do.
But, it also serves as a really logical
place to break your code apart, right?
You can view each section of your route
as a separate JavaScript bundle, and
then we can do smart things like look at,
okay, if you're navigating to this URL,
we know exactly what JavaScript
bundles you're gonna need.
And this lets us like ,load
it incrementally in pieces,
much smaller pieces
because of this nesting.
So if you end up swapping all
the sections, then we can go we're gonna
need these three pieces and we're gonna
load them all in parallel up front.
But then if you just switch one after
that, then we get the next piece.
So this is all kind of
part of the mechanism, but
lazy loading is still async and
it still takes time.
So kinda gonna start building the case
here why we need to be concerned with
asynchronously when working
with our routing solutions.
Because we both have to load the code and
we have to load the data.
Speaking of which, because this was very
key to us, right from the early days,
Solid came up with this kind of idea
of what we call data functions.
And it's similar,
if you've seen some other frameworks they
have like concept of,
like get server side props or loaders.
But the difference is we build this
as a client solution before we
even considered SSR.
So our data functions are built into
the router and not into the framework,
and they've always been.
And essentially the idea is that this
function runs both on the client and
the server.
But the idea is you just set up, you can
create some signals or stores in here, and
you kind of just pass them in.
And if you do data fetching what we'll
do is we'll actually trigger the data
fetching for each segment of the route
even the nested ones in parallel
to kinda prevent waterfalls.
So essentially you're
loading all the code and
all the data in parallel
on any navigation.
And you might be looking at this and
go, okay, this is fine but
what is this createResource
thing in front of us?
I'm trying to get ahead of it and said,
I kinda hint to that earlier, but
in Solid, one of our primitives that
are built in is this idea of a resource.
And what a resource is, is it's
basically a promise to signal converter.
It's the easiest way I can put it.
It handles lots of things like loadings or
gives indicators or
things like loading state and
error states and whatnot.
And essentially, it takes in a source,
which in this case,
the user ID, it could be a query could
be whatever, something reactive.
And then it feeds it
into an async function,
that way you can do your fetching.
And then whenever the source changes
the async function updates and
you have this primitive that gives you the
data and you can use inside your views.
And the thing is there is one
important detail to understand
about resources and
make them a little bit special.
Resources are basically
their source of truth
isn't where they're created,
but where they are read.
This is why we have a special
primitive for this, and
we're not just using an effect
that writes a signal or something.
It's because we care about where you
use them in your user interface.
And what I mean by this, let's pretend
our fetch fails and we throw an error.
It doesn't error where
we created the resource,
it actually throws where
you read the resource.
So this is important because it allows
it to be co-located where the UI is.
So we understand like what UI is
affected by the resource failing.
And.
There's a reason for this,
we care about async consistency.
Almost as much as Dan Abramov from
React care about consistency.
That's really the goal of async
handling in Solid.js.
We want to ensure that
our UIs stay in sync.
That's the whole thing with reactivity,
everything stays in sync.
And we wanna ensure that
we don't get tearing,
ie showing inconsistent state between
what it has resolved and what has not.
Have you ever been on a site where
you navigated between tabs and
the tab updates, but the content hasn't?
So you might be like looking at a list
of movies you click on like a filter or
like, show me my movies and
the tab proceeds the content loading,
that's the tearing I'm talking about.
And the reason we're trying to
avoid it is because if there's
this inconsistency between
what we show the end user and
like what the internal state of
the app is, it can lead to bad things.
Mostly because we trust the end
user when they perform an action,
we trust their intent and
they trust what they see.
So if you break that trust you have
a problem because they think they're
seeing something and they interact with
it when it's really something else.
Let's pretend you could, heart,
let's say you have a list of users and
you're scrolling through them,
and you can say like them.
If you switch to the next user, but
they're still showing the old users info
because you haven't showed them yet.
But you've conceptually made the move
because you've updated the ID, and
then click heart in that gap.
Which user are they liking?
Are they liking the user that
you're showing them or the user for
the ID that's updated?
This is very important to
us as kinda consistency.
And the truth of the matter is,
there's different ways
we handle this in UI.
But to handle it,
we have this mechanism called suspense.
And the idea is just like I was
talking about throwing the errors when
there's an error.
Well, similar to error boundaries we
detect when you read a resource and
it's out of date,
like it's in the process of fetching.
And we use a slightly different
mechanism than some other libraries that
implement suspense.
Instead of focusing on
like throwing promises,
because that would cause
a lot of re-rendering.
What we do is we use context and
we look up the tree,
and instead of halting execution,
because halting
execution caused a lot of rerunning and
a lot of waterfalls.
We just tell the parent that
would be doing the conditional,
kinda like the show component,
conceptually.
Hey, don't show this content yet.
Show the loading indicator, right?
The whole point of this is to
keep our UIs consistent and
I guess to show loading indicators,
but that's secondary.
And the very last concept that
I'm gonna talk about today is,
Showing loading indicators are great, and
especially using something like suspense we can
kinda consolidate all
those loading indicators.
But there is one kind of gotcha with it,
so to speak.
It's that sometimes it's really jarring.
I already talked about the experience
when you change the tabs and
you see the old data.
But changing the tabs and
always falling back to this kinda
loading thing is also very jarring.
What we kind of ideally want
is show the current state,
show that current tabs like you
haven't changed the navigation.
Show everything the way it was except
maybe give some kinda indication that it's
changed.
And then when you complete
loading the new page,
then show it all finished, essentially.
Of course, that's a little hard
to do because how do you have
an interactive page being
showed to the user and
at the same time be already rendering
the next page that they're about to go to?
And for that, we needed to do
something called concurrent rendering.
And to do concurrent rendering, you kind
of we've already seen reactivity today,
but we had to actually
fork the reactive graph.
That's the best way I can explain it.
It's kinda like doing merges on GitHub,
where we basically forked what
we have at any point where we recognize
this is a change, this is a transition,
this is something that we want
to do kinda in the background.
We just set that signal and every
downstream change that happens after that,
we just do in a separate graph.
The current UI stays interactive and
updates.
And then as those changes come
in we merge them at the end and
give you the new state once
everything async is finished.
This is very technical, I'm not gonna
show you how that works to be fair but
I want you to be aware of it because it
does have user interface considerations.
And I have one last tutorial
example to show you.
Where is it?
Before we move on to actually seeing
this in a real life situation.
And that, I wanna show this because
I wanna emphasize the difference
here between the different user
interface experiences, okay?
I have some tabs, all right?
And when I click between those tabs,
I see a loading state immediately and
this isn't bad.
But I wanted to show this because
this is what I'm talking about.
I mean,
this might be Twitter essentially, but
it doesn't feel app like and
it's somewhat jarring to have this UI.
If you like this UI,
it's fine, you can do this.
But what we can do essentially is,
we can use transitions as a mechanism to
control this a little
bit more granularly and
basically change it so
that we don't do this.
And I'm gonna again,
jump a little bit ahead here.
But by getting our use transition API
here, we can now return something that
indicates that the transitions running and
the function to start our transition.
And by wrapping our signal
right in a transition,
we're basically isolating that
change from the rest of the system.
And so for our UI, this simple
change of just saying, hey, wrap,
this one setter with our start for
our transition, allows us to indicate
to Solid that, hey, any existing
suspense boundaries on the page,
we want those to, actually stay in
the past, rather than go to the fallback.
And then, we can use our class lists here,
to just give some kinda pending
indicator while it's working.
And what this does is when we switch,
notice that this won't change right away.
Instead, it's slightly dimmed
before we actually switched.
And honestly,
you can use different effects if you want,
this might not be the most
convincing version of this.
But the idea is we're staying in
the past until the data is loaded and
then giving, I used a CSS kinda
transition for that, like slow blurring.
But gives the end user an indicator
that something has changed.
And actually what I'm gonna do here is
inside our component, which has our data,
we're just faking a delay
with a resource essentially.
Resources trigger this automatically,
we can just make this delay
a little bit more emphasized.
So maybe 800 milliseconds
on a random thing,
and actually maybe I should actually
emphasize the fixed amount.
You could still see that loading when we
initially load the page, but now when
we switch between the routes we get
this kind of smoother transition thing.
People might debate whether this is
better UI or not, but we think it is and
the reason I'm talking about this right
now is because Solid's router transitions
are baked in.
You don't you don't write the transitions
yourself, it's just how it works, okay?
So that's the story,
first party support for
suspense transitions and data fetching
all built into the framework.
We're pretty happy where we've gotten
to it, we've had these features for
about three years now.
And we've been playing with them and
testing them and
kind of evolving them over that time.